## 2.1. A Simple, Cheesy Example

This example illustrates using of a JAAS policy file to grant permissions to the executing code. Our application will check to see if it’s been granted permission to write to a file called `cheese.txt`. The first time we run the application, permission will be denied because the permission has been commented out in the policy file. Then, we’ll uncomment the permission grant in the policy file, giving the code permission to write to the file. Finally, with the correct permission granted, the application will be able to write to `cheese.txt`.

### 2.1.1. The “Application”

Here is the application code:

```
package chp02;

import java.io.File;
import java.io.IOException;

public class Chp02aMain {
  public static void main(String[] args) throws IOException { 
    File file = new File("build/conf/cheese.txt");
    try {
      file.canWrite();
      System.out.println("We can write to cheese.txt"); 
    } catch (SecurityException e) {
      System.out.println("We can NOT write to cheese.txt"); 
    }
  } 
}
```

The above code simply checks to see if we have been granted permission to write to the filebuild/conf/cheese.txt. When we run the application for the first time, we’ll turn on the Java security manager by specifying in the system propertyjava.security.manager. By default, the security manager is very restrictive in what permissions are granted: only the bare minimum needed to execute the program and check some basic system properties are granted. The default set of permissions does not include access to just any file, such ascheese.txt.

2.1.2 Running Without Permission

To run the program for the first time, execute the commandant run-chp02a. This Ant command will do the following:

1. Compile the code.

2. “Build” the required configuration files, such as the policy.

3. Execute the command to run the application.

The command that runs the application, which the Ant task executes on your behalf, is:

java -cp build/java  
 -Djava.security.manager -Djava.security.policy=build/conf/chp02a.policy chp02.Chp02aMain

This command turns on the Java security manager, and specified the policy file to use. The security manager performs permission checks as needed, while the policy file describes the permissions that are granted to executing code and users. We’ll learn much more about the security manager and the policy file in upcoming sections and chapters.

When this command is run for the first time, you’ll see the following output:

run-chp02a:  
 \[java\] We can NOT write to cheese.txt

This output indicates that the application has not been granted permission to write to the cheese file. A quick look at the policy file will confirm this:

grant  
 {  
 // permission java.io.FilePermission "build/conf/cheese.txt", "write"; };

We’ll go over the policy file format later, but for now all you need to notice is that permission to write to the cheese file has been commented out with the leading “//”.

2.1.3 Running with Permission

Before we execute the application again, uncomment the grant by opening the file src/conf/chp02a.policy, and deleting the leading double slashes. After doing this, when we run the ant command ant run-chp02a again, we’ll see the below output:

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 2.5 License:http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.5/

JAAS in Actionby Coté /www.JAASbook.com/www.DrunkAndRetired.comrun-chp02a:

\[java\] We can write to cheese.txt

With the permission grant uncommented in the policy file, our code now has been granted permission to write to the filecheese.txt.

